Everest mount write docs (#8725)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/reference/mount.md

⚠️ No installation is required. Please [contact us](http://info.lakefs.io/thanks-lakefs-mounts) to get access to the Everest binary.
{: .note }

****

> Everest mount write mode is now available for MacOS on experimental mode!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everest mount supports writing to the file system and now available for NFS (the default protocol for MacOS)!
```

> Everest mount supports writing to the file system for NFS (the default protocol for MacOS)!

Reviewer 2: Let's also show how to explicitly mount using NFS elsewhere.

Author: I'm not sure I understand what you mean by that

> Everest mount supports writing to the file system and now available for NFS (the default protocol for MacOS)!

Reviewer 3: Nit; I don't like `now available` comments since it's never maintained. Maybe just
```suggestion
Everest mount supports writing to the file system for NFS (the default protocol for MacOS)!
```

Author: I wanted to emphasize that it's in experimental mode.

[Everest mount write mode limitations](mount-write-mode-limitations.md).

> {: .note }

Author: I do not agree!
1. It should be at the beginning of the page so users will be aware of the fact that write-mode is available now.
2. I think we agreed we won't have a "write-mode" section.

## Command Line Interface

### Mount Command
The `mount` command is used to mount a lakeFS repository to a local directory, it does it in 2 steps:
- Step 1: Starting a server that listens on a local address and serves the data from the remote lakeFS repository.
- Step 2: Running the required mount command on the OS level to connect the server to the local directory.

#### Tips:
- Since the server runs in the background set `--log-output /some/file` to view the logs in a file.
- Cache: Everest uses a local cache to store the data and metadata of the lakeFS repository. The optimal cache size is the size of the data you are going to read/write.
- Reusing Cache: between restarts of the same mount endpoint, set `--cache-dir` to make sure the cache is reused.
- Mounted data consistency (read-mode): When providing lakeFS URI mount endpoint `lakefs://<repo>/<ref>/<path>` the `<ref>` should be a specific commit ID. If a branch/tag is provided, Everest will use the HEAD commit instead.

> - When running mount in write-mode, the lakeFS URI should be a branch name, not a commit ID or a tag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When running mount in write-mode, the lakeFS URI must be a branch name, not a commit ID or a tag.
```

everest umount <data_directory>
````

### Diff Command (write-mode only)
The `diff` command Show the diff between the source branch and the current mount directory. 
If `<data_directory>` not specified, the command searches for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.
Please note that the diffs are from the source branch state at the time of mounting and not the current state of the source branch, i.e., changes to the source branch from other operations will not be reflected in the diff result.

```bash

> everest diff <data_directory>

Reviewer: output of --help is `<mount_directory>` 

```suggestion
everest diff <mount_directory>
```

#Example output:
# - removed cats/persian/cute.jpg
# ~ modified dogs/golden_retrievers/cute.jpg
# + added birds/parrot/cute.jpg
```

### Commit Command (write-mode only)
The `commit` command commits the changes made in the mounted directory to the original lakeFS branch.

> If `<data_directory>` not specified, the command searches for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `<mount_directory>` not specified, the command searches for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.
```

> If `<data_directory>` not specified, the command searches for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `<mount_directory>` not specified, the command searches for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.
```

> The new commit will be merged to the original branch with the `source-wins` strategy in case of conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new commit will be merged to the original branch with the `source-wins` strategy.
```

> After committing, the mounted directory will be updated with the HEAD of the source branch; that means that changes made to the source branch out of the mount scope will also be reflected in the mounted directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the commit is successfully, the mounted directory source commit will be updated to the HEAD of the latest commit at the source branch; that means that changes made to the source branch out of the mount scope will also be reflected in the mounted directory.
```

****

> ⚠️ Writes to a mount directory during commit may be lost.

Reviewer: Incorrect render all the commit content appears as a notification
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/55fa70aa-56dd-44b0-ad2f-12c36baec61e)

{: .note }

```bash

> everest commit <data_directory>

Reviewer: output of --help is `<mount_directory>` 

```suggestion
everest commit <mount_directory>
```

> everest commit <data_directory>

Reviewer: Either here or in the description mention that `-m` to add optional message

everest umount <data_directory>
````

### Diff Command (write-mode only)
The `diff` command Show the diff between the source branch and the current mount directory. 

> If `<data_directory>` not specified, search for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `<data_directory>` not specified, the command searches for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.
```

> Please note that the diffs are from the source branch state at the time of mounting and not the current state of the source branch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please note that the diffs are from the source branch state at the time of mounting and not the current state of the source branch, i.e. changes to the source branch from other operations will not be reflected in the diff result.
```

```bash
everest diff <data_directory>

#Example output:
# - removed cats/persian/cute.jpg
# ~ modified dogs/golden_retrievers/cute.jpg
# + added birds/parrot/cute.jpg
```

### Commit Command (write-mode only)
The `commit` command commits the changes made in the mounted directory to the original lakeFS branch.

> If `<data_directory>` not specified, search for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `<data_directory>` not specified, the command searches for the mount directory in the current working directory and upwards based on `.everest` directory existence.
```

The new commit will be merged to the original branch with the `source-wins` strategy in case of conflicts.

> Writes during commit may be lost.

Reviewer 3: I would put that as a warning.

Author: @itaiad200 
which sentence here?
Rhe one that warning about writes during a commit?

find ./pets -name "*.small.jpg"
open -a Preview "./pets/dogs/golden_retrievers/cute.jpg"
everest umount "./pets"
```

#### Working with Data Locally
Mount the remote lakeFS server and use all familiar tools without changing the workflow.
```bash
everest mount lakefs://image-repo/main/datasets/pets/ ./pets
pytorch_train.py --input ./pets
duckdb "SELECT * FROM read_parquet('pets/labels.parquet')"
everest umount ./pets
```

> ### Write Mode

Reviewer: I think this should be it's own section i.e `##` not nested under examples 
Please add some context here and link to semantics section

Author: As I see it, it is supposed to look like this:
Examples:
  Read-mode:
    Example1:
    Example2:
  Write-mode:
    Example1:
    ...

#### Changing Data Locally
Mount the remote lakeFS server in write mode and change data locally.
```bash
everest mount lakefs://image-repo/main/datasets/pets/ ./pets --write-mode
# Add a new file
echo "new data" > ./pets/birds/parrot/cute.jpg

> # Update an existing file
> echo "new data" > ./pets/dogs/golden_retrievers/cute.jpg

Reviewer: The comment is confusing, this truncates and an existing file - change: 

```suggestion
# Update an existing file
echo "new data" >> ./pets/dogs/golden_retrievers/cute.jpg
```

find ./pets -name "*.small.jpg"
open -a Preview "./pets/dogs/golden_retrievers/cute.jpg"
everest umount "./pets"
```

##### Working with Data Locally
Mount the remote lakeFS server and use all familiar tools without changing the workflow.
```bash
everest mount lakefs://image-repo/main/datasets/pets/ ./pets
pytorch_train.py --input ./pets
duckdb "SELECT * FROM read_parquet('pets/labels.parquet')"
everest umount ./pets
```

### Write Mode

##### Changing Data Locally

> Mount the remote lakeFS server in write mode and change data locally.

Reviewer: Add URL to the semantics here as well

Author: I'm not sure I understand this comment.
What URL?

Reviewer: The second page you created with semantics

Author: Again, not sure what do you mean
Add URL of what? in which context?

      "action": [
        "fs:ListObjects",
        "fs:ReadCommit",

>         "fs:ReadBranch",

Reviewer: ```json
        {
        	"action": ["fs:ReadConfig"],
        	"effect": "allow",
        	"resource": "*"
        }
```

        "fs:ReadTag",
        "fs:ReadRepository"
      ],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "arn:lakefs:fs:::repository/<repository-name>"
    }
  ]
}
```

The minimal RBAC permissions required for mounting a prefix from a lakeFS repository in write mode look like this:
```json
{
  "id": "MountPolicy",

>   "statement": [

Reviewer: Add
```json
        {
        	"action": ["fs:ReadConfig"],
        	"effect": "allow",
        	"resource": "*"
        }
```

    {
      "action": [
        "fs:ReadObject",
        "fs:WriteObject",
        "fs:DeleteObject"
      ],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "arn:lakefs:fs:::repository/<repository-name>/object/<prefix>/*"
    },
    {
      "action": [

>         "fs:ListObjects",

Reviewer: Add  `fs:RevertBranch`

Author: why revert?
when do we revert?

You can use lakeFS’s existing [Role-Based Access Control mechanism](../security/rbac.md), which includes repository and path-level policies. lakeFS Mount translates filesystem operations into lakeFS API operations and authorizes them based on these policies.

> The minimal RBAC permissions required for mounting a prefix from a lakeFS repository in read-only mode look like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The minimal RBAC permissions required for mounting a prefix from a lakeFS repository in read-only mode:
```

      "action": [
        "fs:ListObjects",
        "fs:ReadCommit",
        "fs:ReadBranch",
        "fs:ReadTag",
        "fs:ReadRepository"
      ],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "arn:lakefs:fs:::repository/<repository-name>"
    },
    {
      "action": ["fs:ReadConfig"],
      "effect": "allow",
      "resource": "*"
    }
  ]
}
```

> The minimal RBAC permissions required for mounting a prefix from a lakeFS repository in write mode look like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The minimal RBAC permissions required for mounting a prefix from a lakeFS repository in write mode:
```
